PEP 831: Frame pointers (#4896)
python/peps: peps/pep-0830.rst

> PEP: 830

Reviewer: I think the next available number is 831 - 830 is already taken: https://github.com/python/peps/pull/4592

is fundamentally limited by the absence of frame pointers. The core motivation
of this PEP is to make Python observable by default, so that profilers are
faster and more accurate, debuggers are more reliable, and eBPF-based tools
are functional without workarounds.

Today, users who want to profile CPython with system tools must rebuild the
interpreter with special compiler flags, a step that most users cannot or will
not take.  The Fedora 38 frame-pointer proposal [#fedora38]_ highlights this as
the key problem: without frame pointers in the default build, developers must
"recompile their program with sufficient debugging information" and "reproduce
the scenario under which the software performed poorly," which is often
impossible for production issues.  Ubuntu 24.04's analysis [#ubuntu2404]_ makes
the same argument: frame pointers "allow bcc-tools, bpftrace, perf and other
such tooling to work out of the box."  The goal of this PEP is to make that the
default experience for Python.

The performance wins that profiling enables far outweigh the modest overhead of
frame pointers.  As Brendan Gregg notes: "I've seen frame pointers help find

> performance wins ranging from 5% to 500%" [#gregg2024]_.  A 1-2% overhead that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
performance wins ranging from 5% to 500%" [#gregg2024]_.  A 0.5-2% overhead that
```

the entire call stack::

    ┌──────────────────┐
    │  main()          │ ◄─── frame pointer chain
    │  saved %rbp ─────┼──► (bottom of stack)
    ├──────────────────┤
    │  PyRun_String()  │
    │  saved %rbp ─────┼──► main's frame
    ├──────────────────┤
    │  _PyEval_Eval…() │
    │  saved %rbp ─────┼──► PyRun_String's frame
    ├──────────────────┤
    │  call_function() │ ◄─── current %rbp
    │  saved %rbp ─────┼──► _PyEval_Eval's frame
    └──────────────────┘

Stack unwinding is the process of walking this chain to reconstruct the call
stack.  Profilers do it to find out where the program is spending time;
debuggers do it to show backtraces; crash handlers do it to produce useful
error reports.  With frame pointers, unwinding is a simple pointer chase: read
``%rbp``, follow the link, repeat. It takes microseconds and requires no
external data.

At optimisation levels ``-O1`` and above, GCC and Clang omit frame pointers by
default [#gcc_fomit]_.  This frees the ``%rbp`` register for general use,
giving the optimiser one more register to work with. On x86-64 this is a gain
of one register out of 16 (about 7%).  The performance benefit is small

> (typically 1-2%) but it was considered worthwhile when the convention was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(typically 0.5-2%) but it was considered worthwhile when the convention was
```

  Andrii Nakryiko (all Meta/Facebook) [#fedora38]_. Google similarly compiles
  all internal critical software with frame pointers [#fedora38]_.
* Ubuntu 24.04 analysis: "The penalty on 64-bit architectures is between 1-2%
  in most cases." [#ubuntu2404]_
* Fedora 38 test suite: individual benchmark regressions of approximately 2%
  (kernel compilation 2.4%, Blender rendering 2%) [#fedora38]_.

The pyperformance ``scimark_sparse_mat_mult`` benchmark regressed 9.5% in
Fedora's testing, the worst case in that run (see `Detailed Performance
Analysis of CPython with Frame Pointers`_ below); first-party measurements on
CPython 3.15-dev show larger individual regressions on ``xml_etree_*``
benchmarks (up to 1.31x), though the geometric mean remains around 1%. These
worst-case benchmarks exercise C helper function calls almost exclusively; real
applications distribute CPU time across the interpreter, C extensions, I/O, and
system calls.

A common misconception in the community is that frame pointers carry large
overhead "because there was a single Python case that had a +10% slowdown."
[#hn-fp]_  That single case is the eval loop benchmark; the geometric mean

> across real workloads is 1-2%.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
across real workloads is 0.5-2%.
```

  pointers since early 2026 [#pbs992]_.

CPython has not yet adopted this change.

Why Not Use ``CFLAGS_NODIST`` Instead of ``CFLAGS``
---------------------------------------------------

CPython's build system provides ``CFLAGS_NODIST`` specifically for flags that
should apply to the interpreter but not propagate to extension module builds
via ``sysconfig``.  Using ``CFLAGS_NODIST`` would confine the overhead to the
interpreter itself.

This PEP deliberately chooses ``CFLAGS`` over ``CFLAGS_NODIST`` because frame
pointers are only useful when the chain is continuous. Unlike debugging aids
such as sanitizers or assertions, which are useful even when applied to a
single component, a frame-pointer chain with a gap at a C extension boundary
produces the same broken stack trace as no frame pointers at all.  The
profiler, debugger, or eBPF tool cannot skip the gap and resume unwinding.

This distinguishes frame pointers from other flags placed in ``CFLAGS_NODIST``:
those flags (such as ``-Werror`` or internal warning suppressions) are
correctness or policy controls that are meaningful per-compilation-unit.  Frame
pointers are an ecosystem-wide property that is only effective when all

> participants cooperate. The 1-2% overhead measured on CPython is driven by its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
participants cooperate. The 0.5-2% overhead measured on CPython is driven by its
```

Raspberry Pi (aarch64).                1.002x slower
Ampere Altra Max (aarch64)             1.020x slower
AWS Graviton c7g.16xlarge (aarch64)    1.027x slower
Intel i7 12700H (x86-64)               1.019x slower
AMD EPYC 9654 (x86-64)                 1.008x slower
Intel Xeon Platinum 8480 (x86-64)      1.006x slower
=====================================  =======================

This overhead applies to both the interpreter and to C extensions that inherit
the flags via ``sysconfig``.  Detailed microarchitectural analysis shows the
overhead is purely from additional instructions (frame-pointer prologues in
~6,000 helper functions), with no pathological cache, TLB, or branch-prediction
effects (see `Detailed Performance Analysis of CPython with Frame Pointers`_).
Typical C extension code does not exhibit the same density of small function
calls as the CPython runtime.  Numerically intensive extensions (NumPy, SciPy)
typically spend their hot loops in BLAS/LAPACK or vectorised intrinsics that
are compiled separately and unaffected by Python's ``CFLAGS``.  Extensions with
hot scalar C loops (e.g., Cython-generated code) may see measurable but modest
overhead.

> For context, 1-2% geometric mean is comparable to overhead routinely accepted

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For context, 0.5-2% geometric mean is comparable to overhead routinely accepted
```
